```
### INCINERATION

In this video we're going to consider the advantages and the disadvantages to waste incineration. What do you think are the advantages of burning waste instead of committing it to landfill? Pause the video and continue when you have an idea or some ideas. If the waste is not burned then it is likely to end up in a landfill site, which is considered to be the least environmentally friendly option. Incineration could result in a reduction in waste volume of around 90% and this could be particularly important for small cities where space is scarce and landfill is not an option. Odours and rodents that are present in other methods are not a problem when using incineration as a garbage disposal method. Nearly all of the waste that is burned could be used to generate electricity in what is called energy from waste schemes, where households and industries could benefit from the electricity or heat produced. The electricity generated could help to pay for the start-up cost of the incinerator. Additionally, the steam produced from incineration presents itself as a cost-saving energy source, if recycled. Ash produced from these incinerators could be used in the construction and road-building industries. In addition, metals could be extracted from the ash and they could also be used in steel industries. The key advantage, however, is that the production of electricity and thermal energy from waste enables us to conserve conventional sources of energy, such as fossil fuels. Now, what about the disadvantages of incineration? Again, pause the video and think about what these could be. Resume when you have an idea or some ideas. The main disadvantage surrounds potential pollutants found in the ash left in the incinerator and those that could be emitted from the chimney. These include dioxins, acid gases, nitrogen oxide, heavy metals and particulates. As you may have heard from other videos, these are airborne particles which are small enough to get into the lungs of humans. They cause and aggravate respiratory problems such as asthma. However, it is the dioxins resulting from incomplete combustion contained in the gases from the chimneys that attract the most concern. This is because they are suspected of causing cancer. In addition, these emissions could be distributed through the food chains and accumulate over a long period of time impacting on both ecosystems and human health. As a result, many people are opposed to having incinerators built in or near their communities. Another disadvantage is the initial start-up cost to build a waste incinerator for the production of electricity and may not be seen as a viable alternative, where cheaper waste disposal methods exist. Once built, the maintenance of the machinery could be costly. The biggest disadvantage, however, is that if waste is incinerated without first being sorted, this means we are incinerating waste that could have been recycled. So, in summary, incineration of waste presents numerous advantages. 1. Any energy is used to heat or to produce electricity for homes and industry. 2. This method reduces the need for fossil fuel consumption. 3. The ash produced can be recycled for metals used in the steel industry. And finally, 4. This method reduces the volume of waste produced. There are also disadvantages. 1. Incinerators are expensive to build and maintain. 2. Pollutants in the ash and emissions from incinerators are harmful to health and ecosystems. And finally, 3. Waste that could be recycled will instead be incinerated if not properly sorted. 1. Incinerators are expensive to build and maintain. 2. Pollutants in incinerators are harmful to health and ecosystems. 3. Pollutants in incinerators are harmful to health and ecosystems. And finally, 4. The waste that could be recycled will instead be recycled.

### LANDFILL

Whenever you throw away your rubbish, do you ever wonder where it goes, what happens to it and the effect this can have on the environment? The answer is that everything that has not been recycled or reused ends up in a landfill site. What do you think this means? If you think that a landfill is an open hole in the ground where we bury the rubbish, you'd be wrong. In fact, it is a carefully designed structure built into or on top of the ground to store your rubbish in such a way that it will be isolated from groundwater. Our freshwater supply will be kept dry, preventing leaking into this groundwater and will not come into contact with the air, causing horrible smells. This isolation is achieved with a bottom liner, typically made from very thick PVC and a daily covering of soil. However, in many countries, open rubbish tips still exist, causing environmental and health problems. If our rubbish is isolated from the surrounding environment, it doesn't decompose. Landfill sites are not like a compost pile, where the purpose is to bury rubbish in such a way that it will decompose quickly. Rather, landfill sites are simply a way that we cope with the vast amounts of rubbish that we produce. Let's now take a look at the parts that make up a landfill cell and how these cells make up organised landfill sites. Groundwater has to be protected from chemicals found in our waste, and so compacted clay is placed on top to act as a physical barrier. On top of this is a very thick waterproof plastic liner. This stops water that contains waste chemicals called leachate from contaminating this groundwater. A geotextile mat, typically made from polypropylene or polyesters, are like a woven fabric, and this too prevents the plastic sheeting from being damaged by the sharp gravel layer as the rubbish on top is compacted. The gravel layer on top of the geotextile mat filters large pieces of debris, allowing only water through. This improves the drainage of the landfill cell. The gravel layer is connected to a leachate pipe, and the leachate is collected through pipes where it goes into a leachate pond. This leachate can't be used as drinking water and needs to be treated like sewage before it can be removed from the site. This must continue even when a landfill site is full. A drainage layer and a soil layer prevent vermin from entering landfill cells. Finally, on top of the landfill cells, old and new, is where buried rubbish is compacted by heavy diggers and machinery. Bacteria in landfill break down the trash under anaerobic conditions, meaning in the absence of oxygen, and so a by-product of this breakdown is landfill gas. This presents a hazard because this gas contains methane, which could explode, therefore it has to be removed. To do this, a series of pipes are embedded within the landfill to collect the gas. In some landfills, this gas is vented or burned. What do you think might be a better use for this gas? Pause the video and continue when you're ready. If you said that the methane in the landfill gas could be used as an energy source, you'd be right. This means it could be collected and burned in boilers to generate electricity. In summary, a landfill is carefully constructed and allows waste only to be stored. It may never decompose and is not really a viable solution for dealing with waste. In addition, extensive monitoring is required to ensure that no leachate escapes into the groundwater. This has to happen even once a landfill is no longer in use. There aren't really any upsides to landfill. Although the gas produced can be collected and burned as a fuel, it can also cause explosions if not vented properly. So we need ways to recycle, reuse, and recycle.

### LIFECYCLE ASSESSMENT

A lifecycle assessment is a technique used to assess the environmental impacts associated with all stages of a product's life. The three main features of any lifecycle include a product's manufacture, its use, and its disposal, but there are sometimes other stages which we will consider later. Why do you think it is important to consider these aspects when making a product? Pause the video, think about this, and resume when you are ready. When a device is manufactured, the materials it's made from can have a huge environmental impact. With the wide-scale use of mobile or cell phones since the 90s, not a lot of thought went into the materials used to make them. Now huge numbers of these phones are found in landfill sites. Mobile phones are made of 40% plastic, 40% metals, and 20% trace and ceramic materials. The materials used to make mobiles weren't ready to be used by manufacturers. This means they had to come from somewhere. Have you got any ideas where? Pause the video and resume when ready. Some suggestions would include crude oil, which is used to make plastic casing, or the metals, like copper, used in this circuitry. Also when making the display and the rechargeable batteries, other metals also had to be mined. In doing so, vast amounts of energy were expended. Mobile phones have eight lifecycle assessments, one for each component. These include the printed circuit board, the display, the battery, the keypad, the microphone, the speaker, the plastic casing, and any accessories. Now we're at the manufacturing stage of the lifecycle assessment. Mobile phones made in factories require a great deal of energy to create. It is estimated that during manufacture, a single cell phone uses approximately 1,390 mJ of energy and produces 60 kJ of CO2 emissions. Many products require the use of packaging as well, to prevent spoilage, damage, contamination, and tampering. By considering the materials these phones are made of, or reducing the number used in their manufacture, this can lower some of the energy requirements. The next stage in the lifecycle of a phone is its packaging and transportation. Packaging consumes valuable natural resources, such as paper from trees, plastic from crude oil in the earth, aluminium from oil, or other materials, all of which use energy to extract and result in waste. Although some packaging can be made from recycled materials, in addition, the transport of a phone by plane, truck, rail, or sea, all require use of fossil fuels for energy and contribute to global warming. Next, when making a mobile, or cell phone, the environmental impacts during its useful life also have to be considered. The environmental impact of a phone is lower than say of a car, which burns fuel for its entire life. However, the lifetime of a mobile or cell phone is estimated is only between 18 to 24 months. This means that existing phones are exchanged for newer models, so more and more old phones are being dumped. One way to extend the useful life of your phone and prevent waste is to use the same phone for as long as possible. When you shop, try to make sure you get the service and the phone that's right for you. Inevitably, each phone will come to the end of its useful life. This is the last part, the disposal stage of the lifecycle. How do you think you can dispose of your phone more responsibly? Pause the video and think of some ideas. Resume when you're ready. Some ways would include the reuse of your phone. Just because you may have finished with it, if you donate it to another family member or to a charity, the phone will get a second life. Another way is that you recycle it. Electronics recyclers are becoming very popular. Today, many stores, manufacturers and recycling centers accept cell phones for recycling, while some electronics recyclers only accept large shipments. Communities, schools or groups can work together to collect used cell phones for shipment to electronics recyclers. Some rechargeable batteries can also be recycled, as several retail stores and some communities have started collecting them. When rechargeable batteries are recycled, the recovered materials can be used to make new batteries and other stainless steel products. In the lifecycle assessment, the worst possible scenario is disposal in a landfill. Lifecycle analysis of all unmanufactured goods are beginning to be made. Cars, for example, are being constructed so they can be taken apart more easily at the end of their useful life, and the separate parts are recycled properly. you

### RECYCLING

A common definition is that recycling is a process which allows waste materials to be turned into new products and prevents the waste of potentially useful materials. Recycling reduces the use of fresh materials. It acts to reduce energy usage, reduces air pollution from incineration, reduces water pollution from landfilling by reducing the need for conventional waste disposal and has lower greenhouse gas emissions as compared to fresh material production. So with all of these benefits you must be wondering if there are any limits to a process that can have such a positive effect on the environment. Limits to recycling are often considered in terms of energy, hazards, costs and practices by individuals and countries. The biggest limit to recycling however is that not all materials can be recycled or can only be recycled a number of times before they lose their quality. Some materials once used are always going to have to be dumped as we have no method for making them useful again. What sorts of materials do you think can be recycled? See if you can come up with 5. Pause the video and continue when ready. Commonly these are the materials that are recycled. Glass, paper, metal, plastic, textile and electronics. How many did you get? Now let's consider the different limitations. First up is the energy aspect. Put simply some materials like paper and aluminium metal are agreed to have lower processing costs when it comes to recycling them rather than using fresh materials to make new products. However the recycling of materials like plastics is extremely energy intensive. Before the plastics can be melted and mixed together they require sorting usually by hand as there are many different types of plastics usually indicated by a special marking and number. When a mixture of plastic is recycled together they either contaminate the melt or you get a lower grade of plastic than the originals which is therefore less valuable. This reduction in the quality of a recycling product is called downcycling. In addition to this there is the added complication that devices often use mixed materials. Think of a car, there are a wide range of recyclable materials, the copper wire, the aluminium in the engine, some of the plastics, the glass and the iron. However what about the alloys? These are mixtures of metals. Energy will be needed to separate these and so one of the most difficult problems of recycling is the separation of randomly intermixed particles. Secondly there are hazards to recycling including the recycling of dangerous metals. Can you think of any dangerous metals? Pause the video and name some. Continue when you are ready. Some of the metals associated with recycling are lead and mercury. Often these metals can come from the recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment. In India and China a significant amount of pollution is generated where informal recycling in an underground economy of these countries has generated an environmental and health disaster. High levels of lead, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, polychlorinated dioxins and furans as well as polybrominated dioxins have become concentrated in the air, bottom ash, dust, soil, water and sediments in areas surrounding these underground recycling sites. Many of these chemicals become dissolved in the water that we drink called leachate. Also plants can take up these chemicals allowing toxic chemicals to enter the food chain. Finally if the chemicals are airborne there are problems with us inhaling them. There are also social issues connected to recycling. Whilst it may create jobs they are often jobs with low wages and terrible working conditions in developing countries. In areas without many environmental regulations or worker protections job like ship breaking can result in deplorable conditions for both workers and the surrounding communities. Thirdly is a challenge for you. What do you think the cost of recycling depends on? Pause, think and continue when ready. A good answer might be that the cost of recycling depends on the efficiency of the recycling programme. Governments or local authorities may not recycle because it's cheaper to use landfill. Also consumers are encouraged to recycle but this depends on people being involved in pre-sorting their recycling. Some countries or local governments impose charges when this is not done.

In the previous video, Limits to Recycling, we looked at the overall limits to recycling of materials. We touched on plastics in that video. You may be aware that the biggest problem in recycling plastics is they are not biodegradable. So that soft drinks bottle, or your wrappers that you just threw away, are not biodegradable. This means the fate of most plastics is to go into landfill sites, or our oceans, where it will take hundreds, possibly thousands of years for them to degrade. You may say, what about recycling? Briefly, the problems with recycling plastics are, they have to be manually sorted, which is a labour and energy intensive process. Mixed polymers are found in a range of materials, so cannot be recycled and are often dumped. Once a plastic has been recycled once, it can become downcycled, whereby its quality is decreased. The fact is that plastic recycling rates are far below other recycling rates, but the industry has improved in recent years. Worldwide, seven groups of plastic polymers have been given a plastic identification code that people use for recycling. These you can find on most packaging or plastic materials. Different types of plastics will be recycled by different municipalities, even by different countries in some instances. Generally, it's difficult to recycle plastics with numbers 1 and 2. Plastics in these higher numbers are known as rigid plastics. So the disposal of plastics is a tricky one. Other than reducing their use, recycling or reusing them, what else do you think might be done to dispose of them? Pause the video and continue when you think you have an answer. One way is that the plastic can be incinerated or burnt. Whilst this produces useful energy, some plastics contain polymers that are halogenated. When these polymers are burnt, for instance, PVC, toxic fumes like hydrochloric acid are released. This can cause severe respiratory distress and so is hugely problematic. In addition, burning of polymers produces CO2, a greenhouse gas, and so contributes to global warming. This is because about 10% of the oil is used as petrochemicals. If we then use the polymers again as a fuel for energy production, then at least we're using the oil twice. You may have heard the idea of using bioplastics as a solution, but these too can have problems. What do you think a bioplastic is? Pause the video and resume when you have an answer. A bioplastic is a biodegradable plastic. This means it's compostable and it can be broken down by the result of bacterial action when it is disposed of. Whilst this is a benefit, there are still issues with bioplastics that need solving. Bioplastics often come from renewable raw materials like starch, maize, cellulose and polylactic acids. These are plant-derived materials, and so the ethical question that arises is whether land should be used to grow crops for bioplastic manufacture instead of crops for food. Originally, we said that bioplastics are readily compostable. However, bioplastics are not nearly as readily compostable as regular plant material. If you toss a bioplastic fork into your compost and assume it will be dirt in a few months, you'll be disappointed. Whilst a bioplastic fork is compostable, it requires high-intensity, high-heat commercial composting for that to happen quickly. In summary, plastic disposal has a number of issues with regards to landfills, recycling and incineration. However, bioplastics though slightly better, do not present themselves as the better alternative, because there are issues of land usage, the quality of the bioplastic and how it is composted. The best alternative is to reduce our usage and disposal of plastics altogether.

### GLASS

In this lesson, we will learn about recycling glass. Although the usage of plastics is more common as it is lighter and less prone to breakage, glass is still widely used. Glass is used to make soft drink bottles, food containers such as plates and glasses, and vases. Glass is primarily silicon dioxide, with a small percentage of calcium oxide and sodium oxide. The beauty about glass is that it is 100% recyclable, and unlike paper, it does not break down into smaller components with each recycling process. For the moment, only glass bottles can be recycled, not crystal glass, window glass, and windscreen glass on cars. This is because other materials are added to this type of glass, and the recycling process at the moment cannot separate those materials from glass. First, glass bottles and containers need to be collected and separated according to their color. This is important because the different colors are made due to many different substances that are added. Ideally, green glass will be recycled into green glass and brown glass into brown glass. Any labels present must be removed, and the bottles must be thoroughly washed to ensure that any residual contents and adhesives are removed. The bottles are then crushed into smaller pieces before they are melted. Why is this step important? Please pause the lesson to think about this, and resume when you are ready. This is an important step because the smaller pieces mean that melting will occur quicker due to the increased surface area. Following on the same idea, if you want it to fully dissolve sugar in water, powdered sugar would dissolve faster than a cube of sugar. The smaller pieces of glass are then melted, poured into a mold, and allowed to cool and harden. The bottles are now fully recycled and ready for reuse. This recycling process uses a lot less heat energy than glass blowing, and is therefore a more environmentally friendly option. As well as being recycled into bottles, mixed glass can be crushed to form glass aggregate and used as a cheaper substitute for gravel. In summary, glass is fully recyclable and can be recycled a virtually infinite number of times without being degraded into other products.

### METALS

Certain metals can be extracted from their ores. For example, iron is extracted from hematite in a blast furnace, and copper can be extracted from malachite. The process of extracting metals from their ores can be time-consuming, costly, and harmful to the environment. Other less reactive metals, such as gold and platinum, can be found naturally as native metal. The issue here is that there is a finite or limited supply of these metals on Earth. In this lesson, we will learn about recycling metals and the advantages and disadvantages to these industrial processes. Aluminum is the most commonly recycled metal. Aluminum is used to make soft drink cans, aluminum foil, certain food cans, and even certain packaging materials. Aluminum is also used to make the outer bodies of some cars and airplanes, due to the fact that it is less dense than steel. The extraction of aluminum from its ore is done by electrolysis. It may not seem like a lot of electrical energy is needed, but keep in mind that this is done on an industrial scale worldwide. The recycling of aluminum uses only 5% of the energy used in its extraction from its ore, which uses a small voltage but a large current. In fact, some countries really encourage recycling by having separate sections in their public waste containers, one for waste, one for cans and other metal products, and another for paper products. Some countries also have mandatory household recycling, in a sense that if aluminum cans are found in regular waste bins for pickup, a fine can be issued. In fact, recycling aluminum is so common that any aluminum material that you encounter today has some, if not more, than 50% recycled aluminum content. Steel can be recycled, and most steel mills primarily use recycled scrap steel instead of cast or pig iron from blast furnaces. Copper is also recycled. Once again, this is a more energy-efficient process than the extraction from its ore. As well, the copper ore supply on Earth is being depleted at a very fast rate. As a result, other methods for the extraction of copper, such as phytomining and bioleaching, are being used instead. Silver and gold from jewelry are also recycled. As these metals are found as native metals, the issue here is not the energy cost, but rather the rarity of these metals. The main source of gold is recycled electronic goods, such as computers, which have their electrical contacts plated with gold, so there is no corrosion and a perfect electrical connection. The main issue with recycling metals is the separation process in the waste containers. Most often, not all metal products are clearly labeled as recyclable. As well, many metal products are alloys. Can you remember what an alloy is? Please pause the lesson and continue when you are ready. An alloy is a mixture of two or more elements, with at least one of the elements in the mixture as a metal. Many metal products are made into alloys for increased strength and other desirable properties. But not all alloys can be recycled, such as manganese-aluminum alloys. Some alloys, which can be recycled, need to be molten and separated into their constituent metals, thereby making it a more energy-costly process. As well, we have to take into consideration the fact that these metal products must first be collected and then transported to recycling facilities. All depending on the distances covered, this could involve quite a bit of fuel usage, and therefore increasing CO2 and noxious gas emissions. In summary, aluminum, steel, and copper are the most commonly recycled metals, and the recycling process usually uses significantly less energy than extraction from their ores.

### PAPER

Look around you, there are so many paper products, from the sheets of paper that you write on, to the pages of your textbook, to ink cartons, to newspapers, to certain grocery bags, to cardboard boxes, and the list continues. The important fact here is that paper is an essential part of our lives. You may know that paper usually comes from trees. They must first be chopped down and then subjected to an industrial process called pulping, which removes lignin, the polymer that gives trees their strong, hard structure. Obviously, the paper production process has led to mass deforestation. The main issue here is that the trees are not being replanted, or if they are being replanted, they will not grow fast enough to replace the trees that are being cut down. This is a serious environmental issue because it destroys habitats, disrupts food chains and food webs, is a severe eyesore, and indirectly leads to increased carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere. It could also lead to erosion of hillsides with the consequence of flooding. An obvious solution is to recycle these paper products. In this lesson, we will learn about recycling paper and the advantages and disadvantages to this industrial process. Paper is in fact layers of cross-linked cellulose fibers. Recall that cellulose is a polymer of glucose monomer units. If you tear a piece of paper and look closely, you will see fine hairs sticking out. These fine hairs are cellulose fibers. When paper products are recycled, these cellulose fibers are merely pulled apart and rearranged into new paper products. In some countries, paper recycling is highly encouraged by having specialized waste containers just for paper waste. The paper waste is then collected and separated according to their properties. Sheets of paper are recycled with other sheets of paper, and cardboard boxes are recycled with other cardboard boxes. Now, right before the paper can be recycled, any ink needs to be removed. This process is called de-inking. Most inks are petroleum-based inks, which are derived from crude oil products and can be difficult to remove. Currently, in development are soy-based inks, which are derived from a renewable resource and makes it easier for the paper to be de-inked. Metal parts such as staples and paper clips need to be removed with a magnet, and glues are removed with a chemical wash. Bleach is sometimes added to whiten the slurry, and therefore the resulting paper product will be brighter. The cellulose fibers in the slurry are mixed with new pulp, and then allowed to settle on a gauze and rolled to form the new sheets of paper. This step also removes any excess water from the slurry before it is air-dried. The main disadvantage with recycling paper is that it can only be done a few times. Recycled paper is usually used to make kitchen rolls, toilet paper, and packaging materials. Each time a paper product is recycled, the cellulose fibers become shorter, thereby rendering the recycled paper product a little bit less useful than the original. However, this can be used for another purpose. Can you remember what cellulase is? Hint, it is an enzyme. Please pause the lesson to think about this, and resume when you are ready. Cellulase is the enzyme that breaks cellulose apart into its glucose monomers. Currently, the industrial usage of cellulase is to break down cellulose into glucose. The glucose obtained can then be fermented by certain bacteria to produce ethanol, which can then be used as a biofuel. In summary, recycling paper products help to reduce the rate of deforestation and consumes a lot less energy. Although paper can only be recycled a few times, the cellulose fibers can be broken apart into glucose monomers, which can then be used for other environmentally friendly applications.
```